docs/specs/energy-bar-system/requirements.md, before:

# Feature: Energy Bar System (Dual-Session Indicators)

## 1. Introduction
This document outlines the requirements for the Energy Bar System, which is designed to work in concert with the **Dual-Input Mode** feature (see `../dual-input-mode/requirements.md`). This system manages the AI's "energy" level by maintaining separate energy pools for the **STS (voice call)** and **TTS (text chat)** sessions, with dedicated indicators for each mode.

As rate limits for more powerful models are exhausted in a specific session, the system will gracefully degrade to a less powerful model for that session only, communicating the change to the user through dedicated session-specific energy indicators and immersive conversational prompts.

## 2. Epics

### 2.1. Epic: Tiered Model State Management (Dual-Mode)
This epic covers the logic for tracking the current model tier for both STS and TTS modes and managing the fallback to lower tiers when rate-limit failures occur in either mode. The TTS mode uses a simplified 3-level system (2, 1, 0) to avoid redundant model switches, while STS maintains the full 4-level system (3, 2, 1, 0).

#### 2.1.1. User Story: Track Independent Energy Levels with Mode-Specific Ranges
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to maintain separate energy level states for STS (3, 2, 1, 0) and TTS (2, 1, 0) modes,
- **so that** energy depletion in one mode does not affect the other and TTS avoids unnecessary model reconnections.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Initialize at full energy for both modes
  Given the application starts
  When the Energy Bar System is initialized
  Then the energy level for STS is set to 3
  And the energy level for TTS is set to 2.

Scenario: TTS energy levels are constrained to 2, 1, 0
  Given the TTS mode is active
  When energy levels are managed
  Then the TTS energy level can only be 2, 1, or 0
  And the TTS energy level never reaches 3.
```

#### 2.1.2. User Story: Downgrade Energy Level on Mode-Specific Rate Limit
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to decrement the energy level for the specific mode (STS or TTS) where a rate limit error is detected,
- **so that** the application can switch to the next model tier for that mode only.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Downgrade STS energy on call rate limit
  Given the current STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  And a rate limit error is detected during an STS call
  When the system processes the error
  Then the STS energy level is set to 2
  And the TTS energy level remains 2.

Scenario: Downgrade TTS energy on chat rate limit
  Given the current STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  And a rate limit error is detected during a TTS chat session
  When the system processes the error
  Then the TTS energy level is set to 1
  And the STS energy level remains 3.

Scenario: TTS fallback model at energy level 1
  Given the TTS energy level is 1
  When the system needs to select a model for TTS
  Then the system uses "gemini-2.0-flash-live-001" as the fallback model
  And this provides stable TTS functionality at reduced capability.
```

#### 2.1.3. User Story: Reset STS Energy Level on New Call Session
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to reset the **STS energy level** to the highest tier at the start of every new call session,
- **so that** each call starts with the best possible model, without affecting the TTS energy state.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Start a new call after previous session was exhausted
  Given the STS energy level was 0 at the end of the last call
  And the TTS energy level is 1
  When a new STS session is connected (a new call starts)
  Then the STS energy level is reset to 3
  And the TTS energy level remains 1.
```

#### 2.1.4. User Story: Log Mode-Specific Energy Level Changes
- **Priority**: Medium
- **As a** developer,
- **I want** every change in energy level to be logged with its corresponding mode (STS or TTS),
- **so that** I can easily trace model switching behavior.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Log an STS downgrade event
  Given the debug logger is enabled for the 'energy-bar-system' component
  And the STS energy level is 3
  When a rate limit error on an STS call causes a downgrade
  Then a debug log is emitted with the message "Energy level downgraded"
  And the log data includes the mode ('sts'), old level (3), new level (2), and reason ("rate-limit-exceeded").
```

### 2.2. Epic: Dual-Session Energy Indicators
This epic covers the UI components that visually represent energy levels for both STS and TTS sessions, displayed contextually within their respective interfaces.

#### 2.2.1. User Story: Display STS Energy Indicator in Call Interface ✅ IMPLEMENTED
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** to see a battery-style energy indicator within the call interface when I'm on a call,
- **so that** I am aware of the current energy level of the AI during the voice conversation.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Display STS energy indicator during call
  Given I am in an active call
  When the call interface is displayed
  Then an STS energy indicator is visible in the call header area
  And the indicator reflects the current STS energy level.

Scenario: Hide STS energy indicator when not calling
  Given I am not in an active call
  When the main interface is displayed
  Then no STS energy indicator is visible anywhere in the UI.
```

#### 2.2.2. User Story: Display TTS Energy Indicator in Chat Interface
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** to see a battery-style energy indicator within the chat interface when I'm texting,
- **so that** I am aware of the current energy level of the AI during text conversations.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Display TTS energy indicator in chat header
  Given I am viewing the chat interface
  When the chat window is displayed
  Then a TTS energy indicator is visible in the chat header area
  And the indicator reflects the current TTS energy level.

Scenario: TTS energy indicator shows 2-level system
  Given the TTS energy indicator is visible
  When the TTS energy level is 2
  Then the indicator shows 2 out of 2 bars filled and is green.

Scenario: TTS energy indicator shows degraded state
  Given the TTS energy indicator is visible
  When the TTS energy level is 1
  Then the indicator shows 1 out of 2 bars filled and is yellow.

Scenario: TTS energy indicator shows exhausted state
  Given the TTS energy indicator is visible
  When the TTS energy level is 0
  Then the indicator shows 0 out of 2 bars filled and is red.
```

#### 2.2.3. User Story: Independent Energy Indicator Updates
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** each energy indicator to update independently based on its respective session,
- **so that** I can clearly understand the energy state of each interaction mode separately.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: STS energy change does not affect TTS indicator
  Given both STS and TTS energy indicators are visible
  And the STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  When the STS energy level drops to 2
  Then the STS indicator updates to show 2 bars
  And the TTS indicator remains unchanged showing 2 bars.

Scenario: TTS energy change does not affect STS indicator
  Given both STS and TTS energy indicators are visible
  And the STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  When the TTS energy level drops to 1
  Then the TTS indicator updates to show 1 bar
  And the STS indicator remains unchanged showing 3 bars.
```

### 2.3. Epic: Persona-Based Conversational Prompts (Mode-Aware)
This epic covers the different conversational prompts Gemini-chan will use at each energy level, tailored to the active persona and the specific interaction mode (STS or TTS).

#### 2.3.1. User Story: Persona-Specific Prompts for Degraded STS Energy
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** Gemini-chan's conversational prompts during a call to change based on her STS energy level,
- **so that** the experience feels immersive and I understand the reason for any change in conversational depth.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Medium STS energy prompt for VTuber persona
  Given the STS energy level is 2
  And the selected persona is 'VTuber'
  When the system needs to display a prompt during a call
  Then a message like "I'm getting a little sleepy... " is used.

Scenario: Low STS energy prompt for Assistant persona
  Given the STS energy level is 1
  And the selected persona is 'Assistant'
  When the system needs to display a prompt during a call
  Then a message like "My emotional scanner’s flickering... I can still hear you just fine and respond, but my feeling for the conversation’s tone might be a bit off." is used.

Scenario: Exhausted STS energy prompt (sleepy mode)
  Given the STS energy level is 0
  And any persona is selected
  When a user tries to start a call
  Then an immersive, persona-specific "sleepy" prompt is displayed indicating zero consciousness.
```

#### 2.3.2. User Story: Persona-Specific Chat Greetings and TTS Energy Prompts
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** Gemini-chan to greet me with a persona-specific message when I start chatting at full TTS energy,
- **so that** I feel welcomed and encouraged to start a conversation.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: VTuber greeting at TTS energy level 2
  Given the TTS energy level is 2
  And the selected persona is 'VTuber'
  When the chat window is displayed
  Then a greeting like "Hey there! ✨ I'm Gemini-chan, and I'm super excited to chat with you!" is injected into the chat.

Scenario: Assistant greeting at TTS energy level 2
  Given the TTS energy level is 2
  And the selected persona is 'Assistant'
  When the chat window is displayed
  Then a greeting like "Hello! I'm Gemini-san, your professional assistant. I'm ready to help you with any questions or tasks you might have." is injected into the chat.

Scenario: TTS degraded energy prompts injected into chat
  Given the TTS energy level is 1 or 0
  And any persona is selected
  When the energy level changes
  Then a persona-specific degraded energy message is injected directly into the chat window as a model message.

#### 2.3.3. User Story: Timeless System Messages in Chat
- **Priority**: Medium
- **As a** user,
- **I want** system-generated messages, like energy level prompts, to be injected into the chat without a timestamp,
- **so that** the transcript remains clean and focused on the conversational flow.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Energy prompt is injected without a timestamp
  Given the TTS energy level changes from 2 to 1
  When the system injects a degraded energy prompt into the chat
  Then the injected message appears in the transcript without any timestamp.

Scenario: Welcome greeting is injected without a timestamp
  Given the chat window is opened for the first time
  When the system injects a welcome greeting
  Then the greeting message appears in the transcript without any timestamp.
```

Commit message:

feat(energy): expose affective dialog status
Adds `isAffectiveDialogEnabled()` to `EnergyBarService` to allow other
parts of the application to check if affective dialog should be enabled
based on the current STS energy level.

This is based on the requirement to enable the feature only at energy
levels 2 and 3.

Ref: Req 2.1.5

Co-authored-by: zen-ai-roo-gemini-2.5-pro-high-200k <219738659+roomote[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/specs/energy-bar-system/requirements.md, after:

# Feature: Energy Bar System (Dual-Session Indicators)

## 1. Introduction
This document outlines the requirements for the Energy Bar System, which is designed to work in concert with the **Dual-Input Mode** feature (see `../dual-input-mode/requirements.md`). This system manages the AI's "energy" level by maintaining separate energy pools for the **STS (voice call)** and **TTS (text chat)** sessions, with dedicated indicators for each mode.

As rate limits for more powerful models are exhausted in a specific session, the system will gracefully degrade to a less powerful model for that session only, communicating the change to the user through dedicated session-specific energy indicators and immersive conversational prompts.

## 2. Epics

### 2.1. Epic: Tiered Model State Management (Dual-Mode)
This epic covers the logic for tracking the current model tier for both STS and TTS modes and managing the fallback to lower tiers when rate-limit failures occur in either mode. The TTS mode uses a simplified 3-level system (2, 1, 0) to avoid redundant model switches, while STS maintains the full 4-level system (3, 2, 1, 0).

#### 2.1.1. User Story: Track Independent Energy Levels with Mode-Specific Ranges
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to maintain separate energy level states for STS (3, 2, 1, 0) and TTS (2, 1, 0) modes,
- **so that** energy depletion in one mode does not affect the other and TTS avoids unnecessary model reconnections.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Initialize at full energy for both modes
  Given the application starts
  When the Energy Bar System is initialized
  Then the energy level for STS is set to 3
  And the energy level for TTS is set to 2.

Scenario: TTS energy levels are constrained to 2, 1, 0
  Given the TTS mode is active
  When energy levels are managed
  Then the TTS energy level can only be 2, 1, or 0
  And the TTS energy level never reaches 3.
```

#### 2.1.2. User Story: Downgrade Energy Level on Mode-Specific Rate Limit
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to decrement the energy level for the specific mode (STS or TTS) where a rate limit error is detected,
- **so that** the application can switch to the next model tier for that mode only.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Downgrade STS energy on call rate limit
  Given the current STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  And a rate limit error is detected during an STS call
  When the system processes the error
  Then the STS energy level is set to 2
  And the TTS energy level remains 2.

Scenario: Downgrade TTS energy on chat rate limit
  Given the current STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  And a rate limit error is detected during a TTS chat session
  When the system processes the error
  Then the TTS energy level is set to 1
  And the STS energy level remains 3.

Scenario: TTS fallback model at energy level 1
  Given the TTS energy level is 1
  When the system needs to select a model for TTS
  Then the system uses "gemini-2.0-flash-live-001" as the fallback model
  And this provides stable TTS functionality at reduced capability.
```

#### 2.1.3. User Story: Reset STS Energy Level on New Call Session
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to reset the **STS energy level** to the highest tier at the start of every new call session,
- **so that** each call starts with the best possible model, without affecting the TTS energy state.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Start a new call after previous session was exhausted
  Given the STS energy level was 0 at the end of the last call
  And the TTS energy level is 1
  When a new STS session is connected (a new call starts)
  Then the STS energy level is reset to 3
  And the TTS energy level remains 1.
```

#### 2.1.4. User Story: Log Mode-Specific Energy Level Changes
- **Priority**: Medium
- **As a** developer,
- **I want** every change in energy level to be logged with its corresponding mode (STS or TTS),
- **so that** I can easily trace model switching behavior.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Log an STS downgrade event
  Given the debug logger is enabled for the 'energy-bar-system' component
  And the STS energy level is 3
  When a rate limit error on an STS call causes a downgrade
  Then a debug log is emitted with the message "Energy level downgraded"
  And the log data includes the mode ('sts'), old level (3), new level (2), and reason ("rate-limit-exceeded").
```

#### 2.1.5. User Story: Conditionally Enable Affective Dialog for High-Energy STS
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** system,
- **I want** to enable the affective dialog feature for STS sessions when the energy level is 3 or 2,
- **so that** the user experiences a more natural and emotionally resonant conversation when the AI is at its highest capacity.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Affective dialog is enabled at STS energy level 3
  Given the STS energy level is 3
  When an STS session is active
  Then the `enable_affective_dialog` flag is set to true in the API configuration.

Scenario: Affective dialog is enabled at STS energy level 2
  Given the STS energy level is 2
  When an STS session is active
  Then the `enable_affective_dialog` flag is set to true in the API configuration.

Scenario: Affective dialog is disabled at STS energy level 1
  Given the STS energy level is 1
  When an STS session is active
  Then the `enable_affective_dialog` flag is set to false in the API configuration.

Scenario: Affective dialog is disabled at STS energy level 0
  Given the STS energy level is 0
  When an STS session is active
  Then the `enable_affective_dialog` flag is set to false in the API configuration.
```

### 2.2. Epic: Dual-Session Energy Indicators
This epic covers the UI components that visually represent energy levels for both STS and TTS sessions, displayed contextually within their respective interfaces.

#### 2.2.1. User Story: Display STS Energy Indicator in Call Interface ✅ IMPLEMENTED
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** to see a battery-style energy indicator within the call interface when I'm on a call,
- **so that** I am aware of the current energy level of the AI during the voice conversation.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Display STS energy indicator during call
  Given I am in an active call
  When the call interface is displayed
  Then an STS energy indicator is visible in the call header area
  And the indicator reflects the current STS energy level.

Scenario: Hide STS energy indicator when not calling
  Given I am not in an active call
  When the main interface is displayed
  Then no STS energy indicator is visible anywhere in the UI.
```

#### 2.2.2. User Story: Display TTS Energy Indicator in Chat Interface
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** to see a battery-style energy indicator within the chat interface when I'm texting,
- **so that** I am aware of the current energy level of the AI during text conversations.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Display TTS energy indicator in chat header
  Given I am viewing the chat interface
  When the chat window is displayed
  Then a TTS energy indicator is visible in the chat header area
  And the indicator reflects the current TTS energy level.

Scenario: TTS energy indicator shows 2-level system
  Given the TTS energy indicator is visible
  When the TTS energy level is 2
  Then the indicator shows 2 out of 2 bars filled and is green.

Scenario: TTS energy indicator shows degraded state
  Given the TTS energy indicator is visible
  When the TTS energy level is 1
  Then the indicator shows 1 out of 2 bars filled and is yellow.

Scenario: TTS energy indicator shows exhausted state
  Given the TTS energy indicator is visible
  When the TTS energy level is 0
  Then the indicator shows 0 out of 2 bars filled and is red.
```

#### 2.2.3. User Story: Independent Energy Indicator Updates
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** each energy indicator to update independently based on its respective session,
- **so that** I can clearly understand the energy state of each interaction mode separately.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: STS energy change does not affect TTS indicator
  Given both STS and TTS energy indicators are visible
  And the STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  When the STS energy level drops to 2
  Then the STS indicator updates to show 2 bars
  And the TTS indicator remains unchanged showing 2 bars.

Scenario: TTS energy change does not affect STS indicator
  Given both STS and TTS energy indicators are visible
  And the STS energy level is 3
  And the TTS energy level is 2
  When the TTS energy level drops to 1
  Then the TTS indicator updates to show 1 bar
  And the STS indicator remains unchanged showing 3 bars.
```

### 2.3. Epic: Persona-Based Conversational Prompts (Mode-Aware)
This epic covers the different conversational prompts Gemini-chan will use at each energy level, tailored to the active persona and the specific interaction mode (STS or TTS).

#### 2.3.1. User Story: Persona-Specific Prompts for Degraded STS Energy
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** Gemini-chan's conversational prompts during a call to change based on her STS energy level,
- **so that** the experience feels immersive and I understand the reason for any change in conversational depth.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Medium STS energy prompt for VTuber persona
  Given the STS energy level is 2
  And the selected persona is 'VTuber'
  When the system needs to display a prompt during a call
  Then a message like "I'm getting a little sleepy... " is used.

Scenario: Low STS energy prompt for Assistant persona
  Given the STS energy level is 1
  And the selected persona is 'Assistant'
  When the system needs to display a prompt during a call
  Then a message like "My emotional scanner’s flickering... I can still hear you just fine and respond, but my feeling for the conversation’s tone might be a bit off." is used.

Scenario: Exhausted STS energy prompt (sleepy mode)
  Given the STS energy level is 0
  And any persona is selected
  When a user tries to start a call
  Then an immersive, persona-specific "sleepy" prompt is displayed indicating zero consciousness.
```

#### 2.3.2. User Story: Persona-Specific Chat Greetings and TTS Energy Prompts
- **Priority**: High
- **As a** user,
- **I want** Gemini-chan to greet me with a persona-specific message when I start chatting at full TTS energy,
- **so that** I feel welcomed and encouraged to start a conversation.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: VTuber greeting at TTS energy level 2
  Given the TTS energy level is 2
  And the selected persona is 'VTuber'
  When the chat window is displayed
  Then a greeting like "Hey there! ✨ I'm Gemini-chan, and I'm super excited to chat with you!" is injected into the chat.

Scenario: Assistant greeting at TTS energy level 2
  Given the TTS energy level is 2
  And the selected persona is 'Assistant'
  When the chat window is displayed
  Then a greeting like "Hello! I'm Gemini-san, your professional assistant. I'm ready to help you with any questions or tasks you might have." is injected into the chat.

Scenario: TTS degraded energy prompts injected into chat
  Given the TTS energy level is 1 or 0
  And any persona is selected
  When the energy level changes
  Then a persona-specific degraded energy message is injected directly into the chat window as a model message.

#### 2.3.3. User Story: Timeless System Messages in Chat
- **Priority**: Medium
- **As a** user,
- **I want** system-generated messages, like energy level prompts, to be injected into the chat without a timestamp,
- **so that** the transcript remains clean and focused on the conversational flow.

##### Acceptance Criteria
```gherkin
Scenario: Energy prompt is injected without a timestamp
  Given the TTS energy level changes from 2 to 1
  When the system injects a degraded energy prompt into the chat
  Then the injected message appears in the transcript without any timestamp.

Scenario: Welcome greeting is injected without a timestamp
  Given the chat window is opened for the first time
  When the system injects a welcome greeting
  Then the greeting message appears in the transcript without any timestamp.
```
