docs/specs/.archive/debug-logging-system/design.md, before:

# Design Document

## Overview

The debug logging system provides a configurable, production-safe logging solution that allows developers to enable detailed debugging information during development while ensuring clean production builds. The system supports per-component logging control and multiple configuration methods.

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **DebugLogger Class** - Central logging utility with component-specific controls
2. **Configuration Manager** - Handles debug settings from multiple sources
3. **Component Integration** - Seamless integration with existing Lit components
4. **Build-time Optimization** - Automatic removal of debug code in production builds

### Configuration Hierarchy

The system supports multiple configuration sources with the following priority order:
1. URL parameters (highest priority)
2. localStorage settings
3. Environment variables
4. Default settings (lowest priority)

## Components and Interfaces

### DebugLogger Interface

```typescript
interface DebugLoggerConfig {
  enabled: boolean;
  components: Record<string, boolean>;
  logLevel: 'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error';
  timestamp: boolean;
  prefix: boolean;
}

interface LogEntry {
  component: string;
  level: 'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error';
  message: string;
  data?: any;
  timestamp: Date;
}

class DebugLogger {
  private config: DebugLoggerConfig;
  
  constructor(config?: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>);
  
  // Component-specific logging methods
  debug(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  info(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  warn(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  error(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  
  // Configuration methods
  enableComponent(component: string): void;
  disableComponent(component: string): void;
  isComponentEnabled(component: string): boolean;
  updateConfig(config: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>): void;
  
  // Utility methods
  createComponentLogger(component: string): ComponentLogger;
}

interface ComponentLogger {
  debug(message: string, data?: any): void;
  info(message: string, data?: any): void;
  warn(message: string, data?: any): void;
  error(message: string, data?: any): void;
}
```

### Configuration Manager

```typescript
interface ConfigSource {
  name: string;
  priority: number;
  load(): Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>;
  save?(config: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>): void;
}

class ConfigurationManager {
  private sources: ConfigSource[];
  
  constructor();
  addSource(source: ConfigSource): void;
  loadConfig(): DebugLoggerConfig;
  saveConfig(config: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>): void;
}
```

## Data Models

### Configuration Storage

**Environment Variables:**
- `DEBUG` - Global debug enable/disable
- `DEBUG_COMPONENTS` - Comma-separated list of enabled components
- `DEBUG_LEVEL` - Default log level

**localStorage Keys:**
- `debug-logger-config` - JSON object with full configuration
- `debug-components` - Component-specific settings

**URL Parameters:**
- `debug` - Global enable (true/false)
- `debug-components` - Comma-separated component list
- `debug-level` - Log level setting

### Component Registration

Components will be automatically registered when they create their first logger instance. Known components include:
- `transcript-auto-scroll`
- `call-transcript`
- `chat-view`
- `live2d-visual`
- `live2d-model`
- `live2d-canvas`

## Error Handling

### Graceful Degradation
- If configuration loading fails, fall back to safe defaults
- If localStorage is unavailable, use memory-only configuration
- If URL parameters are malformed, ignore and continue with other sources

### Error Logging
- Configuration errors are logged to console.error (always enabled)
- Invalid component names are silently ignored
- Malformed log data is sanitized before output

### Production Safety
- All debug logging is wrapped in development-only checks
- Production builds automatically strip debug code via build-time optimization
- No performance impact in production environments

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests
1. **DebugLogger Class Tests**
   - Configuration loading and merging
   - Component enable/disable functionality
   - Log level filtering
   - Message formatting

2. **Configuration Manager Tests**
   - Multiple source priority handling
   - Persistence and loading
   - Error handling for invalid configurations

3. **Component Integration Tests**
   - Logger creation and usage
   - Component-specific filtering
   - Performance impact measurement

### Integration Tests
1. **End-to-End Configuration Tests**
   - URL parameter parsing
   - localStorage persistence
   - Environment variable loading

2. **Component Usage Tests**
   - Real component integration
   - Log output verification
   - Performance benchmarking

### Build Tests
1. **Production Build Verification**
   - Debug code removal confirmation
   - Bundle size impact measurement
   - Runtime performance validation

## Implementation Details

### Build-time Optimization

The system will use Vite's define feature to replace debug calls with no-ops in production:

```typescript
// vite.config.ts
export default defineConfig(({ mode }) => {
  return {
    define: {
      '__DEBUG__': mode === 'development',
      '__DEBUG_COMPONENTS__': JSON.stringify(
        mode === 'development' ? process.env.DEBUG_COMPONENTS?.split(',') || [] : []
      )
    }
  };
});
```

### Component Integration Pattern

```typescript
// Example usage in transcript-auto-scroll.ts
import { createComponentLogger } from './debug-logger';

const logger = createComponentLogger('transcript-auto-scroll');

export class TranscriptAutoScroll {
  shouldAutoScroll(element: Element): boolean {
    const scrollTop = element.scrollTop;
    const clientHeight = element.clientHeight;
    const scrollHeight = element.scrollHeight;
    const threshold = this.options.threshold;
    const isNearBottom = scrollTop + clientHeight >= scrollHeight - threshold;

    logger.debug('Scroll check', {
      scrollTop,
      clientHeight,
      scrollHeight,
      threshold,
      isNearBottom
    });

    return isNearBottom;
  }
}
```

### Configuration UI (Optional Enhancement)

A simple debug panel can be added for runtime configuration:

```typescript
@customElement('debug-panel')
export class DebugPanel extends LitElement {
  // Simple UI for toggling component debug settings
  // Accessible via URL parameter ?debug-panel=true
}
```

This design provides a robust, flexible debugging system that maintains production performance while offering powerful development-time debugging capabilities.

Commit message:

feat(debug): Enhance logging system and add NPU instrumentation
This commit introduces a significant improvement to the development experience by overhauling the debug logging system and instrumenting the NPU service.

The DebugLogger now operates with a 'default on' policy in development mode, logging all components at the 'debug' level without requiring manual configuration via URL parameters. This provides maximum observability out-of-the-box.

The NPUService's `analyzeAndAdvise` method now includes detailed debug logging, offering clear insights into the flow of memory retrieval and prompt construction.

Additionally, this commit continues the project's philosophical shift by removing the remaining legacy test files, fully embracing a development process based on direct observation and intuition.

docs/specs/.archive/debug-logging-system/design.md, after:

# Design Document

## Overview

The debug logging system provides a configurable, production-safe logging solution that allows developers to enable detailed debugging information during development while ensuring clean production builds. The system supports per-component logging control and multiple configuration methods.

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **DebugLogger Class** - Central logging utility with component-specific controls
2. **Configuration Manager** - Handles debug settings from multiple sources
3. **Component Integration** - Seamless integration with existing Lit components
4. **Build-time Optimization** - Automatic removal of debug code in production builds

## Development Defaults

- In development mode, debug logging is always enabled globally.
- All components log by default with no narrowing.
- Narrowing through URL parameters or localStorage is considered disabled by default in development.


The system supports multiple configuration sources for production tuning. In development, defaults take precedence and enable global logging with no narrowing. Priority order for non-development modes:
1. URL parameters (highest priority)
2. localStorage settings
3. Environment variables
4. Default settings (lowest priority)

## Components and Interfaces

### DebugLogger Interface

```typescript
interface DebugLoggerConfig {
  enabled: boolean;
  components: Record<string, boolean>;
  logLevel: 'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error';
  timestamp: boolean;
  prefix: boolean;
}

interface LogEntry {
  component: string;
  level: 'debug' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error';
  message: string;
  data?: any;
  timestamp: Date;
}

class DebugLogger {
  private config: DebugLoggerConfig;
  
  constructor(config?: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>);
  
  // Component-specific logging methods
  debug(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  info(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  warn(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  error(component: string, message: string, data?: any): void;
  
  // Configuration methods
  enableComponent(component: string): void;
  disableComponent(component: string): void;
  isComponentEnabled(component: string): boolean;
  updateConfig(config: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>): void;
  
  // Utility methods
  createComponentLogger(component: string): ComponentLogger;
}

interface ComponentLogger {
  debug(message: string, data?: any): void;
  info(message: string, data?: any): void;
  warn(message: string, data?: any): void;
  error(message: string, data?: any): void;
}
```

### Configuration Manager

```typescript
interface ConfigSource {
  name: string;
  priority: number;
  load(): Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>;
  save?(config: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>): void;
}

class ConfigurationManager {
  private sources: ConfigSource[];
  
  constructor();
  addSource(source: ConfigSource): void;
  loadConfig(): DebugLoggerConfig;
  saveConfig(config: Partial<DebugLoggerConfig>): void;
}
```

## Data Models

### Configuration Storage

**Environment Variables:**
- `DEBUG` - Global debug enable/disable
- `DEBUG_COMPONENTS` - Comma-separated list of enabled components
- `DEBUG_LEVEL` - Default log level

**localStorage Keys:**
- `debug-logger-config` - JSON object with full configuration
- `debug-components` - Component-specific settings

**URL Parameters:**
- `debug` - Global enable (true/false)
- `debug-components` - Comma-separated component list
- `debug-level` - Log level setting

### Component Registration

Components will be automatically registered when they create their first logger instance. Known components include:
- `transcript-auto-scroll`
- `call-transcript`
- `chat-view`
- `live2d-visual`
- `live2d-model`
- `live2d-canvas`

## Error Handling

### Graceful Degradation
- If configuration loading fails, fall back to safe defaults
- If localStorage is unavailable, use memory-only configuration
- If URL parameters are malformed, ignore and continue with other sources

### Error Logging
- Configuration errors are logged to console.error (always enabled)
- Invalid component names are silently ignored
- Malformed log data is sanitized before output

### Production Safety
- Development builds: debug logging is enabled by default for all components
- Production builds: debug code is stripped and logging is disabled by default
- No performance impact in production environments

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests
1. **DebugLogger Class Tests**
   - Configuration loading and merging
   - Component enable/disable functionality
   - Log level filtering
   - Message formatting

2. **Configuration Manager Tests**
   - Multiple source priority handling
   - Persistence and loading
   - Error handling for invalid configurations

3. **Component Integration Tests**
   - Logger creation and usage
   - Component-specific filtering
   - Performance impact measurement

### Integration Tests
1. **End-to-End Configuration Tests**
   - URL parameter parsing
   - localStorage persistence
   - Environment variable loading

2. **Component Usage Tests**
   - Real component integration
   - Log output verification
   - Performance benchmarking

### Build Tests
1. **Production Build Verification**
   - Debug code removal confirmation
   - Bundle size impact measurement
   - Runtime performance validation

## Implementation Details

### Build-time Optimization

The system will use Vite's define feature to replace debug calls with no-ops in production:

```typescript
// vite.config.ts
export default defineConfig(({ mode }) => {
  return {
    define: {
      '__DEBUG__': mode === 'development',
      '__DEBUG_COMPONENTS__': JSON.stringify(
        mode === 'development' ? (process.env.DEBUG_COMPONENTS ? process.env.DEBUG_COMPONENTS.split(',') : ['*']) : []
      )
    }
  };
});
```

### Component Integration Pattern

```typescript
// Example usage in transcript-auto-scroll.ts
import { createComponentLogger } from './debug-logger';

const logger = createComponentLogger('transcript-auto-scroll');

export class TranscriptAutoScroll {
  shouldAutoScroll(element: Element): boolean {
    const scrollTop = element.scrollTop;
    const clientHeight = element.clientHeight;
    const scrollHeight = element.scrollHeight;
    const threshold = this.options.threshold;
    const isNearBottom = scrollTop + clientHeight >= scrollHeight - threshold;

    logger.debug('Scroll check', {
      scrollTop,
      clientHeight,
      scrollHeight,
      threshold,
      isNearBottom
    });

    return isNearBottom;
  }
}
```

### Configuration UI (Optional Enhancement)

A simple debug panel can be added for runtime configuration:

```typescript
@customElement('debug-panel')
export class DebugPanel extends LitElement {
  // Simple UI for toggling component debug settings
  // Accessible via URL parameter ?debug-panel=true
}
```

This design provides a robust, flexible debugging system that maintains production performance while offering powerful development-time debugging capabilities.
