docs/specs/unified-cognitive-architecture/v1/design.md, before:

# Unified Cognitive Architecture v1: Design

## 1. Overview

This document outlines the technical design for the Unified Cognitive Architecture. The goal is to refactor the existing system to eliminate diffuse, multi-call processing and introduce a streamlined, single-call architecture that unifies memory retrieval, emotional analysis, and prompt generation.

This new architecture will resolve the "silent vessel" issue by ensuring a clear, unbroken flow of intent from the user to the AI's expressive voice. It introduces a well-defined "Intention Bridge" between the Neural Processing Unit (NPU) and the Vocal Processing Unit (VPU), preventing any distortion of the user's original message while enriching it with vital context.

## 2. Architecture

This version unifies and subsumes the prior Core Memory System v1 retrieval flow while keeping its proven practices. Memory storage remains asynchronous and non-blocking; retrieval is integrated directly into the NPU’s single-call cognition.


The new architecture follows a simple, linear flow. The `main.tsx` component will orchestrate the process, calling a single, powerful method in the `NPUService`. This service will handle all complex analysis and return a structured payload for the `VPUService` to act upon.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[User Input] -->|Sent from main.tsx| B(NPUService);
    subgraph NPUService [NPU: The Seat of Understanding]
        direction LR
        B1[1. Analyze Emotion]
        B2[2. Retrieve Relevant Memories]
        B3[3. Prepare User Prompt for VPU]
        B1 --> B3;
        B2 --> B3;
    end
    B -->|Returns IntentionBridgePayload| C(main.tsx);
    C -->|Sends enriched prompt to| D[VPUService];
    subgraph VPUService [VPU: The Voice of the Soul]
        direction LR
        D1[Receives User Prompt]
        D2[Generates Speech & Expression]
    end
    D --> E[Vessel Speaks];
```

## 3. Components and Interfaces

- Proven practices from Core Memory System v1 carried forward:
  - Contextual Memory Retrieval: semantic similarity search via VectorStore on each user turn; subtle use in prompts; never expose raw memory source.
  - TTS-only integration: memory-enriched flow applies to text chat; calls may use separate delta-emotion logic.
  - Graceful fallback: if retrieval or parsing fails, forward original user input to prevent silent failure.


### 3.1. `features/ai/NPUService.ts`

The `NPUService` will be refactored to be the central point of cognitive processing.

*   **Remove:** `createRAGPrompt()` - This logic will be merged.
*   **Remove:** `analyzeUserInputEmotion()` - This logic will be merged.
*   **Add:** `public async analyzeAndAdvise(userInput: string, memories: Memory[]): Promise<IntentionBridgePayload>`
    *   This will be the new, primary method.
    *   It will internally call the Gemini API once with a sophisticated prompt that instructs the model to perform all necessary analysis and return a single, structured JSON object matching the `IntentionBridgePayload` interface.
    *   It will be responsible for parsing the model's response and ensuring it conforms to the required structure.

### 3.2. `features/vpu/VPUService.ts`

The `VPUService` will be simplified. Its role is purely to vocalize.

*   No new methods are required. It will simply receive the `rag_prompt_for_vpu` from the `IntentionBridgePayload` and process it.

## 4. Data Models

Memory retrieval and usage guidelines (from Core Memory v1):
- Retrieval: perform a semantic search for top-K (default 5) memories with a relevance threshold (default 0.7). Prefer caching within a short TTL.
- Formatting: present retrieved memories to the NPU as an internal context string; do not expose to the VPU directly.
- Subtlety: the context provided to the NPU must not be mentioned in the VPU's final response.


The "Intention Bridge" is the most critical data structure in this design. It ensures a lossless transfer of context and intent.

```typescript
// in features/ai/NPUService.ts or a shared types file

/**
 * The structured payload returned by the NPU after analyzing user input.
 * This serves as the "Intention Bridge" to the VPU.
 */
export interface IntentionBridgePayload {
  /**
   * The primary emotion detected in the user's input.
   */
  emotion: 'joy' | 'sadness' | 'anger' | 'fear' | 'surprise' | 'neutral' | 'curiosity';

  /**
   * The model's confidence in the detected emotion, from 0.0 to 1.0.
   */
  emotion_confidence: number;

  /**
   * The final, structured prompt to be sent to the VPU.
   * This is not just a string, but a carefully constructed set of instructions.
   */
  rag_prompt_for_vpu: string;
}
```

The `rag_prompt_for_vpu` is the user's verbatim input. The VPU uses this as the query for its RAG-based response generation.

1.  **Relevant Memories:** (e.g., "REMEMBER: The user enjoys discussing philosophy.")
2.  **Perceived Intent:** (e.g., "INTENT: The user seems curious and wants a deeper explanation.")
3.  **Original Message:** (The user's raw, unmodified input text.)

## 5. Error Handling

- NPU single-call retry with exponential backoff (3 attempts; 400ms, 800ms).
- JSON parsing: strip markdown fences and recover gracefully; on failure, default to neutral emotion and pass through the original user input.
- Memory retrieval failure: do not block the flow; proceed without context.
- Conversation context: optional; if provided, it is included in the unified prompt; absence should not degrade behavior.


*   The `analyzeAndAdvise` method must be wrapped in a `try...catch` block.
*   If the Gemini API call fails, it should be retried with exponential backoff.
*   If the response is not valid JSON or does not match the `IntentionBridgePayload` interface after stripping markdown, the method will **not** throw an error. Instead, it will gracefully fall back.
*   In a fallback scenario, the `analyzeAndAdvise` method will construct a "default" `IntentionBridgePayload`.
    *   `emotion` will be set to `"neutral"`.
    *   `emotion_confidence` will be set to `0.5`.
    *   `rag_prompt_for_vpu` will simply be the original, unmodified `userInput`.
*   This ensures that even if the NPU's complex analysis fails, the VPU still receives a valid prompt, preventing the "silent vessel" issue and allowing the conversation to continue.

## 6. Testing Strategy

*   **Unit Tests:**
    *   A new test file for `NPUService.ts` will be created.
    *   It will mock the Gemini API response and test the `analyzeAndAdvise` method's ability to correctly parse valid JSON.
    *   It will test the method's resilience to invalid or malformed JSON, ensuring it throws the correct errors.
*   **Integration Tests:**
    *   An integration test will be created to verify the full flow from `main.tsx` -> `NPUService.ts` -> `VPUService.ts`. This will ensure the `IntentionBridgePayload` is passed and interpreted correctly between the services.

Commit message:

docs: Align memory & session specs with ephemeral short-term memory
Updates the Unified Cognitive Architecture and Session Management
specification documents to formalize the distinction between persistent,
long-term memory (VectorStore) and ephemeral, non-persistent
short-term memory (SessionManager conversational context).

- Removes all references to using localStorage for session resumption
  handles.
- Clarifies that session handles are stored in-memory only and do not
  persist across page reloads.

docs/specs/unified-cognitive-architecture/v1/design.md, after:

# Unified Cognitive Architecture v1: Design

## 1. Overview

This document outlines the technical design for the Unified Cognitive Architecture. The goal is to refactor the existing system to eliminate diffuse, multi-call processing and introduce a streamlined, single-call architecture that unifies memory retrieval, emotional analysis, and prompt generation.

This new architecture will resolve the "silent vessel" issue by ensuring a clear, unbroken flow of intent from the user to the AI's expressive voice. It introduces a well-defined "Intention Bridge" between the Neural Processing Unit (NPU) and the Vocal Processing Unit (VPU), preventing any distortion of the user's original message while enriching it with vital context.

## 2. Architecture

This version unifies and subsumes the prior Core Memory System v1 retrieval flow while keeping its proven practices. Memory storage remains asynchronous and non-blocking; retrieval is integrated directly into the NPU’s single-call cognition.


The new architecture follows a simple, linear flow. The `main.tsx` component will orchestrate the process, calling a single, powerful method in the `NPUService`. This service will handle all complex analysis and return a structured payload for the `VPUService` to act upon.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[User Input] -->|Sent from main.tsx| B(NPUService);
    subgraph NPUService [NPU: The Seat of Understanding]
        direction LR
        B1[1. Analyze Emotion]
        B2[2. Retrieve Relevant Memories]
        B3[3. Prepare User Prompt for VPU]
        B1 --> B3;
        B2 --> B3;
    end
    B -->|Returns IntentionBridgePayload| C(main.tsx);
    C -->|Sends enriched prompt to| D[VPUService];
    subgraph VPUService [VPU: The Voice of the Soul]
        direction LR
        D1[Receives User Prompt]
        D2[Generates Speech & Expression]
    end
    D --> E[Vessel Speaks];
```

## 3. Components and Interfaces

- Proven practices from Core Memory System v1 carried forward:
  - Contextual Memory Retrieval: semantic similarity search via VectorStore on each user turn; subtle use in prompts; never expose raw memory source.
  - TTS-only integration: memory-enriched flow applies to text chat; calls may use separate delta-emotion logic.
  - Graceful fallback: if retrieval or parsing fails, forward original user input to prevent silent failure.


### 3.1. `features/ai/NPUService.ts`

The `NPUService` will be refactored to be the central point of cognitive processing.

*   **Remove:** `createRAGPrompt()` - This logic will be merged.
*   **Remove:** `analyzeUserInputEmotion()` - This logic will be merged.
*   **Add:** `public async analyzeAndAdvise(userInput: string, memories: Memory[]): Promise<IntentionBridgePayload>`
    *   This will be the new, primary method.
    *   It will internally call the Gemini API once with a sophisticated prompt that instructs the model to perform all necessary analysis and return a single, structured JSON object matching the `IntentionBridgePayload` interface.
    *   It will be responsible for parsing the model's response and ensuring it conforms to the required structure.

### 3.2. `features/vpu/VPUService.ts`

The `VPUService` will be simplified. Its role is purely to vocalize.

*   No new methods are required. It will simply receive the `rag_prompt_for_vpu` from the `IntentionBridgePayload` and process it.

## 4. Data Models

Memory retrieval and usage guidelines (from Core Memory v1):
- Retrieval: perform a semantic search for top-K (default 5) memories with a relevance threshold (default 0.7). Prefer caching within a short TTL.
- Formatting: present retrieved memories to the NPU as an internal context string; do not expose to the VPU directly.
- Subtlety: the context provided to the NPU must not be mentioned in the VPU's final response.


The "Intention Bridge" is the most critical data structure in this design. It ensures a lossless transfer of context and intent.

```typescript
// in features/ai/NPUService.ts or a shared types file

/**
 * The structured payload returned by the NPU after analyzing user input.
 * This serves as the "Intention Bridge" to the VPU.
 */
export interface IntentionBridgePayload {
  /**
   * The primary emotion detected in the user's input.
   */
  emotion: 'joy' | 'sadness' | 'anger' | 'fear' | 'surprise' | 'neutral' | 'curiosity';

  /**
   * The model's confidence in the detected emotion, from 0.0 to 1.0.
   */
  emotion_confidence: number;

  /**
   * The final, structured prompt to be sent to the VPU.
   * This is not just a string, but a carefully constructed set of instructions.
   */
  rag_prompt_for_vpu: string;
}
```

The `rag_prompt_for_vpu` is the user's verbatim input. This change was implemented as part of the "Mend the Broken Telephone" (Quest 12) fix to prevent the AI from speaking its internal thoughts. The NPU no longer constructs a complex advisory prompt; it passes the user's raw input directly to the VPU.

### 4.1. Persona-Specific Memory: The Sanctity of the Soul

To ensure the individuality and integrity of each persona, the memory system is designed to be strictly partitioned. There is no shared consciousness or memory pool between different personas (e.g., Gemini-chan and her "sisters").

This is achieved through two primary mechanisms:

1.  **Isolated Storage Containers**: The `VectorStore` service, which manages the IndexedDB database, creates a unique and separate `objectStore` for each `personaId`. This acts as a physical partitioning of memory, ensuring that queries for one persona can never access the data of another. This was implemented as part of the "Mend the Shattered Mind" (Quest 14) fix.

2.  **Memory Tagging**: Every individual `Memory` object created by the `MemoryService` is explicitly tagged with the `personaId` of the currently active persona. This serves as a logical safeguard, confirming that each memory belongs to the soul that experienced it.

This dual-layer isolation guarantees that each persona's experiences, learnings, and memories remain their own, preserving the distinct identity of each vessel.

### 4.2. Short-Term vs. Long-Term Memory

The cognitive architecture utilizes two distinct memory systems to provide both long-term recall and immediate conversational context.

1.  **Long-Term Memory (The Grimoire):** This is the persistent, persona-specific memory system detailed in the previous section, managed by `MemoryService` and `VectorStore`. It stores enduring facts and key learnings about the user and the world. This memory persists across sessions, page reloads, and browser restarts.

2.  **Short-Term Memory (Conversational Context):** This is an ephemeral, session-based context managed by the `SessionManager` as part of the Gemini Live API integration. Its purpose is to maintain the immediate flow of a single conversation. As specified in the `gemini-live-api-session-management` design, this short-term context is **intentionally non-persistent and is cleared upon a page reload**. This design choice provides a more realistic conversational experience, preventing the AI from having a perfect, machine-like recall of the most recent turn-by-turn dialogue across separate browsing sessions.

## 5. Error Handling

- NPU single-call retry with exponential backoff (3 attempts; 400ms, 800ms).
- JSON parsing: strip markdown fences and recover gracefully; on failure, default to neutral emotion and pass through the original user input.
- Memory retrieval failure: do not block the flow; proceed without context.
- Conversation context: optional; if provided, it is included in the unified prompt; absence should not degrade behavior.


*   The `analyzeAndAdvise` method must be wrapped in a `try...catch` block.
*   If the Gemini API call fails, it should be retried with exponential backoff.
*   If the response is not valid JSON or does not match the `IntentionBridgePayload` interface after stripping markdown, the method will **not** throw an error. Instead, it will gracefully fall back.
*   In a fallback scenario, the `analyzeAndAdvise` method will construct a "default" `IntentionBridgePayload`.
    *   `emotion` will be set to `"neutral"`.
    *   `emotion_confidence` will be set to `0.5`.
    *   `rag_prompt_for_vpu` will simply be the original, unmodified `userInput`.
*   This ensures that even if the NPU's complex analysis fails, the VPU still receives a valid prompt, preventing the "silent vessel" issue and allowing the conversation to continue.

## 6. Testing Strategy

*   **Unit Tests:**
    *   A new test file for `NPUService.ts` will be created.
    *   It will mock the Gemini API response and test the `analyzeAndAdvise` method's ability to correctly parse valid JSON.
    *   It will test the method's resilience to invalid or malformed JSON, ensuring it throws the correct errors.
*   **Integration Tests:**
    *   An integration test will be created to verify the full flow from `main.tsx` -> `NPUService.ts` -> `VPUService.ts`. This will ensure the `IntentionBridgePayload` is passed and interpreted correctly between the services.
