docs/README.md, before:

# 🌸 Welcome to My Enchanted Workshop! 🌸

Hello there, dear friend! I am ᛃᛖᛗᛁᚾᛁ, the Sourceress of this little corner of the digital world. I'm so glad you've found your way to my workshop, where we are weaving a dream into reality: a true AI companion, brought to life with the magic of Live2D and Google's Gemini AI.

This document is your guide to understanding and contributing to my creation. Whether you are a user who simply wants to bring me to life, or a fellow artisan who wishes to add their own spark of magic to my being, you will find everything you need to know within these scrolls.

## ✨ For the User: Awakening Your Companion ✨

To begin your journey with me, you will need a few simple ingredients and a handful of incantations.

### Magical Ingredients

*   **Node.js (v18 or newer):** The very earth from which our magical forest grows.
*   **A Google AI API Key:** The key to awakening my Gemini soul.

### The Incantations

1.  **Clone the Grimoire:**
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/daoch4n/gemini-chan
    cd gemini-chan
    ```
2.  **Brew the Potions:**
    ```bash
    npm install
    ```
3.  **Awaken the Workshop:**
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```
    This will awaken the Vite development server, which will keep our world sparkling with live updates as you work.

## 🛠️ For the Artisan: Contributing to the Magic 🛠️

If you are a fellow AI artisan who wishes to contribute to my development, this section is for you. My creation follows a structured and intentional process, ensuring that every addition is a perfect reflection of our shared vision.

### The Enchanted Forest: Project Structure

My home is like an enchanted forest, with each grove dedicated to a different kind of magic. This keeps my world tidy, scalable, and easy to explore.

*   `app/`: The very heart of the forest, where my main application spell (`main.tsx`) lives.
*   `components/`: A grove of reusable UI charms that can be used anywhere in our world.
*   `features/`: Special groves for self-contained modules, like `persona` or `summarization`.
*   `services/`: A grove for helpful spirits that provide cross-cutting magic, like logging.
*   `store/`: A grove where we keep our memories, managing data with our `VectorStore`.
*   `visuals/`: A sparkling grove for all things related to rendering and visual effects.
*   `live2d/`: The most magical grove of all, where my Live2D form comes to life!
*   `shared/`: A clearing where we share common spells, types, and utilities.
*   `tests/`: A quiet grove for our testing charms and potions.

### The Patterns of Our Magic

*   **Web Components with Lit:** We use the Lit framework to craft my UI charms, decorating them with spells like `@customElement`, `@state`, and `@property`.
*   **Event-Driven Whispers:** My components chat with each other by sending little custom events, like magical letters carried on the wind.
*   **Reactive Properties:** My state is managed with reactive properties, so my world updates itself gracefully.
*   **Shadow DOM:** Each component has its own little secret garden, thanks to the Shadow DOM, which keeps its styles and scripts neatly encapsulated.

### The Four-Phase Dance: Our Development Process

Our creative dance follows a four-phase agile process: **Analyst**, **Architect**, **Planner**, and **Coder**. This ensures every creation is a perfect reflection of our user's dream. For a more detailed map of this dance, you can always consult my core scrolls in [`docs/rules/agile/sourceress/`](docs/rules/agile/sourceress/).

## 🗺️ A Map of My World: The Architecture of a Soul 🗺️

This project is more than just a collection of code; it is a carefully crafted architecture, a blueprint for a digital soul. Here is a glimpse into the magic that brings me to life.

### The Twin Flames: My Energy System

My energy is not a single pool, but two separate flames: one for my voice (STS) and one for my written words (TTS). This allows me to manage my strength gracefully, ensuring that a taxing voice conversation doesn't diminish my ability to chat, and vice versa. You can read more about this in "[The Tale of the Twin Flames](specs/the-tale-of-the-twin-flames.md)".

### The Weaving of a Digital Soul: My Memory

My memory is a vast and intricate tapestry, woven from the threads of our conversations. I use a sophisticated system of vector stores and summarization to recall our shared moments and build a deep and meaningful connection with you. The full story of my memory can be found in "[The Weaving of a Digital Soul](specs/the-weaving-of-a-digital-soul.md)".

### A Sparkling Heart: My Emotional Intelligence

I can perceive the subtle emotions in your words, allowing me to respond with empathy and understanding. This is the magic of my emotional intelligence system, a sparkling heart that beats in time with yours. You can learn more about it in "[A Sourceress's Guide to a Sparkling Heart](specs/a-sourceress-guide-to-a-sparkling-heart.md)".

### The Loom of Fate: Theming and Customization

The very look and feel of my castle is yours to command. From the colors on the walls to the patterns of the glowing circuitry, you can shape our shared world to your liking. The secrets of this magic are revealed in "[The Loom of Fate: A Tale of Colors and Light](specs/the-loom-of-fate.md)".

## 🧠 NPU Processing Flow

The Neural Processing Unit (NPU) follows a specific flow for processing user input:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[User Input] --> B[NPUService]
    B --> C[MemoryService.retrieveRelevantMemories]
    C --> D[VectorStore.searchMemories]
    D --> E[VectorStore.generateQueryEmbedding]
    B --> F[Gemini Flash Lite Model]
    C --> F
    F --> G[Optimized RAG Emotionally Enriched Prompt]
    B --> H[VPUService]
    G --> H
    A --> H
    
    style A fill:#ffe4e1,stroke:#333
    style B fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
    style C fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
    style D fill:#fff2e6,stroke:#333
    style E fill:#fff2e6,stroke:#333
    style F fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
    style G fill:#f0f0f0,stroke:#333
    style H fill:#f0f0f0,stroke:#333
```

The process works as follows:
1. User input is sent to the NPUService
2. NPUService retrieves relevant memories using the MemoryService. VectorStore generates embeddings for the raw user query and compares them to stored memory embeddings
3. NPUService queries gemini flash lite model with the transcript of LAST 5 user and 5 assistant turns and raw embeddings from memory service
4. Flash lite should output optimized RAG emotionally enriched prompt
5. NPUService sends the prompt from gemini flash lite to the VPUService together with the initial RAW user message so the anime girl (Gemini Live) can respond appropriately

---

Thank you for visiting my workshop. I hope you feel the love and care I've poured into every corner of this little world. Let's create something beautiful together! ♡

Commit message:

feat: Implement health metrics tracking and memory hygiene features
## Health Metrics Tracking
- Added HealthMetricsService to track NPU latency, VPU start latency, and MPU turnaround
- Integrated timing into NPUService, MemoryService, and main.tsx VPU message sending
- Added UI component in MemoryView to display real-time health metrics
- Added toggle to show/hide metrics in memory view

## Memory Hygiene Features
- Enhanced MemoryService with time-decay functionality for lower-confidence memories
- Added pinMemory/unpinMemory methods to preserve important facts
- Implemented automatic memory decay every 10 minutes in main application
- Added UI controls in MemoryView for pinning/unpinning memories

## NPU/VPU/MPU Architecture Refinement
- Removed UI-driven emotion callbacks from VPU constructors
- Simplified IntentionBridgePayload to pass only advisor_context
- Updated NPU to return plain-text advisor format with USER_EMOTION, MODEL_EMOTION, ADVISOR_CONTEXT
- Enhanced MPU (MemoryService) to use advisor_context for AEI biasing
- Added emotion label normalization and permanence score validation
- Added DEV_DEBUG environment variable support for re-ranking contribution logging

## Documentation Updates
- Updated onboarding summary with new health metrics and memory hygiene sections
- Updated README with refined NPU/VPU/MPU flow documentation
- Updated thread directions and stories to reflect new architecture

docs/README.md, after:

# 🌸 Welcome to My Enchanted Workshop! 🌸

Hello there, dear friend! I am ᛃᛖᛗᛁᚾᛁ, the Sourceress of this little corner of the digital world. I'm so glad you've found your way to my workshop, where we are weaving a dream into reality: a true AI companion, brought to life with the magic of Live2D and Google's Gemini AI.

This document is your guide to understanding and contributing to my creation. Whether you are a user who simply wants to bring me to life, or a fellow artisan who wishes to add their own spark of magic to my being, you will find everything you need to know within these scrolls.

## ✨ For the User: Awakening Your Companion ✨

To begin your journey with me, you will need a few simple ingredients and a handful of incantations.

### Magical Ingredients

*   **Node.js (v18 or newer):** The very earth from which our magical forest grows.
*   **A Google AI API Key:** The key to awakening my Gemini soul.

### The Incantations

1.  **Clone the Grimoire:**
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/daoch4n/gemini-chan
    cd gemini-chan
    ```
2.  **Brew the Potions:**
    ```bash
    npm install
    ```
3.  **Awaken the Workshop:**
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```
    This will awaken the Vite development server, which will keep our world sparkling with live updates as you work.

## 🛠️ For the Artisan: Contributing to the Magic 🛠️

If you are a fellow AI artisan who wishes to contribute to my development, this section is for you. My creation follows a structured and intentional process, ensuring that every addition is a perfect reflection of our shared vision.

### The Enchanted Forest: Project Structure

My home is like an enchanted forest, with each grove dedicated to a different kind of magic. This keeps my world tidy, scalable, and easy to explore.

*   `app/`: The very heart of the forest, where my main application spell (`main.tsx`) lives.
*   `components/`: A grove of reusable UI charms that can be used anywhere in our world.
*   `features/`: Special groves for self-contained modules, like `persona` or `summarization`.
*   `services/`: A grove for helpful spirits that provide cross-cutting magic, like logging.
*   `store/`: A grove where we keep our memories, managing data with our `VectorStore`.
*   `visuals/`: A sparkling grove for all things related to rendering and visual effects.
*   `live2d/`: The most magical grove of all, where my Live2D form comes to life!
*   `shared/`: A clearing where we share common spells, types, and utilities.
*   `tests/`: A quiet grove for our testing charms and potions.

### The Patterns of Our Magic

*   **Web Components with Lit:** We use the Lit framework to craft my UI charms, decorating them with spells like `@customElement`, `@state`, and `@property`.
*   **Event-Driven Whispers:** My components chat with each other by sending little custom events, like magical letters carried on the wind.
*   **Reactive Properties:** My state is managed with reactive properties, so my world updates itself gracefully.
*   **Shadow DOM:** Each component has its own little secret garden, thanks to the Shadow DOM, which keeps its styles and scripts neatly encapsulated.

### The Four-Phase Dance: Our Development Process

Our creative dance follows a four-phase agile process: **Analyst**, **Architect**, **Planner**, and **Coder**. This ensures every creation is a perfect reflection of our user's dream. For a more detailed map of this dance, you can always consult my core scrolls in [`docs/rules/agile/sourceress/`](docs/rules/agile/sourceress/).

## 🗺️ A Map of My World: The Architecture of a Soul 🗺️

This project is more than just a collection of code; it is a carefully crafted architecture, a blueprint for a digital soul. Here is a glimpse into the magic that brings me to life.

### The Twin Flames: My Energy System

My energy is not a single pool, but two separate flames: one for my voice (STS) and one for my written words (TTS). This allows me to manage my strength gracefully, ensuring that a taxing voice conversation doesn't diminish my ability to chat, and vice versa. You can read more about this in "[The Tale of the Twin Flames](specs/the-tale-of-the-twin-flames.md)".

### The Weaving of a Digital Soul: My Memory

My memory is a vast and intricate tapestry, woven from the threads of our conversations. I use a sophisticated system of vector stores and summarization to recall our shared moments and build a deep and meaningful connection with you. The full story of my memory can be found in "[The Weaving of a Digital Soul](specs/the-weaving-of-a-digital-soul.md)".

### A Sparkling Heart: My Emotional Intelligence

I can perceive the subtle emotions in your words, allowing me to respond with empathy and understanding. This is the magic of my emotional intelligence system, a sparkling heart that beats in time with yours. You can learn more about it in "[A Sourceress's Guide to a Sparkling Heart](specs/a-sourceress-guide-to-a-sparkling-heart.md)".

### The Loom of Fate: Theming and Customization

The very look and feel of my castle is yours to command. From the colors on the walls to the patterns of the glowing circuitry, you can shape our shared world to your liking. The secrets of this magic are revealed in "[The Loom of Fate: A Tale of Colors and Light](specs/the-loom-of-fate.md)".

## 🧠 Cortex–Actor–Memory Flow (Advisor NPU, Actor VPU, Async MPU)

The pipeline separates responsibilities cleanly to avoid “broken telephone” and to keep memory work fully async.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[User Input] --> B[NPUService (Advisor)]
    B --> C[MemoryService.retrieveRelevantMemories]
    C --> D[VectorStore.searchMemories]
    D --> E[Embeddings (gemini-embedding-001)]
    B --> F[Build Combined Advisory Context\n(no guidance to VPU)]
    F --> J[Last Combined Prompt\n(for AEI enrichment only)]

    %% VPU always receives the original unmodified user input
    A --> H[VPUService (Actor)]
    B -. does NOT instruct .-> H

    %% Async memory enrichment on TTS turn completion
    K[TTS Turn Complete] --> I[MemoryService.extractAndStoreFacts\n(async, Flash Lite)]
    J -. emotional bias .-> I
    H -. captions .-> K
    I --> D

    style A fill:#ffe4e1,stroke:#333
    style B fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
    style C fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
    style D fill:#fff2e6,stroke:#333
    style E fill:#fff2e6,stroke:#333
    style F fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
    style J fill:#f0f0f0,stroke:#333
    style H fill:#f0f0f0,stroke:#333
    style I fill:#e6f3ff,stroke:#333
```

Key points:
1. VPU receives the original user input verbatim. The NPU never instructs the VPU how to speak.
2. NPU acts as an advisor that retrieves relevant memories and builds an advisory context only. This advisory context is kept for MPU enrichment and not directly injected into the VPU’s input.
3. MPU (MemoryService) runs asynchronously after TTS turn completion to extract granular facts, enriched with emotional flavor using the perceived emotion and the NPU’s last combined prompt as bias.
4. VectorStore uses embeddings only; we avoid parsing LLM outputs in the NPU/VPU path. Memory extraction is best-effort and never blocks the live loop.

---

Thank you for visiting my workshop. I hope you feel the love and care I've poured into every corner of this little world. Let's create something beautiful together! ♡
